# Sorting

## Insertion - O(n^2) BEST

> Pick items from unsorted area and insert into the correct spot
> **Best-Case: O(n)** Great when list is partially sorted
> **Worse-Case: O(n^2)**

```python
def insertion_sort(arr):
    for i in range(1, len(arr)):
        element = arr[i]

```

## Selection Sort - O(n^2)

> Go through the list and find the minimum. Then you can place it at the beginning. After look through the unsorted section and find the new minimum.
>
> **Note:** we SWAP elements since its constant time
> **Best-Case: O(n^2)**
>
> **Worse-Case: O(n^2)**

```

```

## Bubble Sort - O(n^2)

> Look at pairs of elements and make sure the biggest element is to the RIGHT.
> Swap and swap until you get to the end. ONLY swap if the element that is smaller is to the left (`num[i] < nums[i+1]` -> Swap)

```

```

## Merge Sort - O(nlogn) - Divide and Conquer

> Takes advantage of the fact that you can merge 2 SORTED lists fairly easily (use 2 pointers).
> **Time:** We have log(n) levels (each time we split the number of elements in half) and at each level we have 2^i nodes.
> **Space:** At most one branch is on stack at a time O(n)

### Merge Two Sorted Lists - O(n + m)

> n -> length of 1st list
> m -> length of 2nd list

```python

```

### Full Merge Sort

```python

```

## Quicksort - O(nlogn) Average - Divide and Conquer

> **Worse-Case: O(n^2)**
>
> **Average-Case: O(nlog)**
>
> Divide list into 2 lists: one that contains elements less than a **pivot (usually the last element)** and one that contains elements greater. Then, you place them together [smaller + pivot + larger]
>
> **Partioning:** should be an O(n) operation

## Python .sort() and sorted()

### .sort() -> sorts in place (ONLY FOR LISTS)

```python
nums = [3,4,51,23]

# sorts in place
nums.sort()

nums.sort(reverse=True) # in reverse

nums.sort(key=lambda num: num % 10) # sorts based on mod 10

words = ['a', 'fox', 'three']

words.sort(key=len) # sorts by the length of each word
words.sort(key=lambda word: len(word))
```

### sorted() -> returns a new SORTED iterable

```python
letters = 'kudgjhf'
nums = []

sorted_letters = sorted(letters)
```

## Bucket Sort - O(k + n) or O(n)

> Create buckets for each number present. Good if you know the range of the elements to be sorted [min, max]. Create a frequency table for each number (the index corresponds with the value).
>
> k, the range of possible values **(assuming this is a constant value, we have DROP it from the Time complexity) -> O(n)**
>
> n, length of the input list

## Bucket Sort (no integer values)

> Works if you can map non-integer values to integers. Create a bucket of lists (you can append the elements/objects into the inner list).
